Okay, the tape is rolling
Another Holy science fiction theme is alternate universes And I'm somewhat
familiar with R.V. Everett, Wheeler, Graham Many Worlds Interpretation of
Quantum Mechanics And then there's the new Richard Gopp Theory on how the
universe was formed And that there might be an infinite number of those I guess
the problem there is that in either case we could never communicate with these
alternate universes. What are your feelings as a physicist on these theories and
on the possibilities of communicating with other universes if they would exist?
I don't think we got a good answer there. Why don't we go on to something else?
You know, I really haven't thought very much about that, so I really don't have
anything that I think you can use. thanks for admitting that I struggle over
those myself I thought I would cheat and get somebody else to tell me all I'm
saying is unlike gravity where we've got a decent theory and it gave us some
surprises I don't think we really have anything more than science fiction
speculations out of the scientists as far as the alternate theory ideas go
alternate universe ideas go in fact But just offhand, a lot of the ideas I'm
hearing in there I would have expected to see in analog first rather than
physical review. Go ahead.
Any acknowledgements in his book, Macrolife, George Zabrowski lists you as one
of his advisors? Did you have, well, what do you think of George's contention
that the only way a culture ultimately will survive is to leave the dirt balls
and get out into space and wander around, that sort of thing? Well, from a very
long point of view, it's true. If we stay on this dirt ball, we're going to get
swallowed up in a red giant. So we do have to leave here. and I think just from
watching the way nature works in general the way a species survives is to settle
in more than one place besides it would be fun to go out to the stars and
explore them even if we do nothing more than send small colonies out
having us in different places I think it would be a very good idea. After all,
England sent out a lot of different colonies. And although it could keep in
touch with them in times that were short enough so that they could get an
economic benefit out of us, I don't think England really ended up richer for
settling America in the long run, especially after it tried to keep this under
its thumb and lost the Revolutionary War and so forth, but it has ended up with
a good friend. So I expect one way or another that we are going to go out and
explore the universe and settle in the universe if we can find enough places
that we can settle
on without too much difficulty, too much expenditure, we'll always have
scientific colonies out there, of course. But it'd be nice to have a few other
cultures, a few other colonies,
and they will evolve in a different direction than we will because the
environmental pressures will be different. I think that's valuable. We cannot
assume that just because we've been successful so far that we're going to be
successful of the future.
How do you juggle your writing with your full-time position? Well, basically I
write in the evenings and on weekends. I like to read hard science fiction and
for a long time I didn't find very much so So, I'm having to write it if I want
to read it. And I find that once I got started, I find that I enjoy writing a
science fiction story, especially a hard science fiction story, as much as I do
reading one. And so, it's basically my hobby, out of which I'm making some
money. So, I don't watch, you know, TV and I don't really have any other sports
or things that I do. I enjoy writing so much that I do it for a pleasure, not
because it's work. And I think one of the things that I really enjoy is when I'm
able to put together a world and some aliens and a situation, all of which holds
together scientifically.
It's, you know, it's a challenge. It's like trying to solve a research problem
of how do you get this, this, and this to work all together. And you have to
invent tools. In this case, these are imaginary tools to make the thing come
off. So I get just as much ego satisfaction out of constructing a good world and
a good novel. Well, I think the toughest part, as far as I'm concerned, is doing
the final edits, you know, getting the people so that they don't talk scientific
jargon, which scientists don't in the real world. But, of course, when I write
it, I find that most of the characters are spouting jargon and are using things
like it is instead of it's. You know, so right now I'm looking at a page here
and say, oh, there is no need to make this a dramatic one-man production. But
there is no need to make this a dramatic one-man production. So most of my
editing is cleaning it up from a writing point of view. And, but still, you
know, it's fun reading it. And what's kind of interesting, I guess, as a
commentary on my own personality, is that I think I've read Dragon's Egg about
ten times, and every time I read it, I still cry at the sad parts. I must enjoy
it.
Do you find that the creative process of writing perhaps enhances the creative
process of being a scientist and vice versa?
i think that
writing is a process of selling science i mean i've always felt that part of my
job as a scientist was to try and communicate the first the facts of science and
secondly excitement of science to the general public that is not involved in
science because science is at the cutting edge of our intellectual achievements,
whether it's physical sciences, chemical sciences, biological or social or
whatever sciences. This is where we're developing as an intelligent being. and
we're we're learning more about the world around us and how we operate in that
world and it's very exciting to be involved in that and you don't get much many
scientists admitting that it's exciting but it is i mean it's part of the
reasons you get professors working at wages less than they would if they were a
plumber is it's more fun to be a scientist but most of of them are so high-bound
and so concerned about their image that they don't want to admit that they're
having fun. Well, I admit I'm having fun being a scientist, and I think it's
fun, and I think that fun and the excitement and everything else can be
communicated to the general public so that their awareness of the fact that
they're part of an intellectual and evolutionary advance as an intelligent being
can be given to them. I think that's one of the reasons why we have such a spurt
of magazines today like Omni and Science 80 and the Smithsonian and Discovery.
All of these magazines are beginning to realize that people want to be part of
the leading edge of our cultural evolution. And I found that I have the ability
to communicate that. Now, for many years, I would only write science articles,
not fiction. I wouldn't have a story. I'd just say, here's something interesting
I found at the outskirts of science and isn't it wonderful and isn't it great?
And I'd write it down to whatever level was there. and those were science
speculation articles that are sold in analog and omni and places like that. I'm
finding that doing it in the form of fiction reaches more people.
How do your colleagues at Hughes Aircraft and then your ex-academic colleagues
take to your writing? Well, it's been a mixed bag. some of them have always felt
that everything, that all the science I ever did was science fiction anyway but
those were the mug wumps
it's very interesting that a lot of people knew me very well and were very good
friends of mine both at Hughes and as scientists and the minute that I became a
published author I found them approaching me of course with a book in their hand
in a very different attitude it was oh you're somebody else now and you're not
the Bob Forward I knew so I can't just walk up and say hey Bob signed my book
it was as though I've been I was two persons I would find my department manager
at one minute talking to me in a manner in which he was dominant. And then
during lunch period, he came by with his book to be autographed and I found a
fan, complete turnaround in the attitude of the person. And this happened in a
number of different cases. Just an instant commentary. on human characteristics
and also kind of a perturbing commentary on the power of the printed word. A lot
of people that never really used to take me seriously now pay a lot more
attention to me primarily because I got a book published. And it isn't that hard
to get a book published.
what do you have in the works unless you find that very useful let's leave that
out that was a little two weeks ago okay no problem there okay what do you have
in the works what do we expect from you in the future well I have a book right
now sitting in front of my telephone that's in its final editing stages. I
started it in 1979 and worked on it through 79 and 80 and 81. It's now 82. And
it's about done. You should see it in 83. This book is called... I call it Ride
the Magic Dragonfly because in the book is an airplane that is based on the Mars
airplane. It's designed to fly in worlds which have very little atmosphere like
Mars or Titan or something like that. Well actually Titan has quite a bit of
that atmosphere. And the setting is around Barnard's star, which is about six
light years away.
And around Barnard's star are some planets, but a very special one. It's called
Roche World, and that's the title my editor wants to use. The world is named
after E.W. Roche, R-O-C-H-E, a French mathematician, that calculated what the
shape of a star would be if it was very close to another star. In other words,
two stars rotating around each other, and it turns out they turn into a figure
-eight shape or two egg-shapes facing each other. Only in this case, I have two
large moons about the size of Titan that are very close to each other, rotating
around each other about six hours period.
And they're not quite touching. The gravity fields pull them into egg shapes.
And the peaks of the eggs, the top of the eggs, are separated by about 80 to 100
kilometers. But the two planets are so close, they share a common atmosphere. So
I have these worlds, and the humans are going to go and explore them. And one of
the worlds is a little bigger than the other, so it ends up with – one of the
worlds is a little smaller than the other, so it ends up with all of the – it is
the low land. And so it ends up with all of the water. And so it's completely
covered with an ocean. And the ocean gets pulled up into an egg shape. So you
have a mountain of water with slopes of 60 degrees and a rounded top. And it
doesn't fall down, which I think is interesting. But that's what the mathematics
says will happen. And not only that, but the gravity varies. It varies from
about a tenth of the gravity near the base of the mountain to almost zero
gravity at the top. So sea level on a Roche world does not mean equal gravity.
This means equal gravity potential. There's a difference between the gravity
potential and the gravity force. The gravity potential is constant over the
mountain, even though it's egg-shaped, but the gravity force varies all over the
ocean. So it's a very interesting world, and I land the humans on the larger
one, which is called Roche, and our reason to call that is because Roche means
rock in French. The other one is the French word for water, which is E-A-U, or
eau, or since the French always put an article in front of it, d'eau. And I'm not
very good at French, but that's the best I can do. And so we have these two
planets rotating around each other, and in the oceans of one of them are the
aliens. And these aliens are an example of a very intelligent culture which does
not have any technology. And now these are modeled along the lines of whales and
dolphins,
except that they have another unique characteristic. They're divisible. They
weigh about 10 tons, and yet their actual cellular structure, their operation is
more like that of an ant colony than a mammal. All the cells are roughly the
same. And yet, as a whole, they're very intelligent. But any little piece of
them is just like an ant. And so, like slime molds or ant colonies, they have an
overall structure which is completely unknown to each little individual element.
And so, you can tear them apart and they'll reform again, or they can be eaten
by somebody else, but they don't really get eaten. They don't get dissolved
down. They just, little cells get their identity, excuse me, their allegiance
transferred. So it makes for kind of a different culture because they never die.
The only reason they die, well, actually they never really die. The only reason
they come out and get out of circulation is that they are much better
mathematicians than humans. And they give themselves research problems to solve.
Then they go off and turn it into a solid lump and sit there and think about the
problems. And if they give themselves a problem that takes too long to solve,
then finally they use up all their energy and they sort of dissipate away. So
that's the only way that they die, and normally they don't do that. Normally
they solve the problem. So you have creatures that are thousands and thousands
of years old, and we meet them and realize how superior they are in one sense
Intellectually they're superior especially mathematically but in terms of being
able to control their environment to have any technology they don't. So it's an
example of a very intelligent creature that we will never find with all of the
radio searches we'll ever do. The only way we're going to find those is to go
there. So that's the basic scenario and the basic aliens and there's another
theme going through the story about the fact that this is a one-way mission.
Humans we send take 40 years to get there and by the time they get there they're
nearing retirement age.
Basically it's a one-way mission but it's not a suicide mission. This is a
concept that I've been pushing for quite a while and Joan
Binge used it in one of her stories and it also has in it the mechanism for
getting them there and this one uses a laser pushed light sail and the idea here
is to have lasers in orbit around the sun collecting light from the sun turning
into laser light and sending it through a very large lens that's 1000 km in
diameter and it's easy to make because it's made of pieces of plastic and
nothing and it's called a Fresnel Zone Lens and this can focus the laser light
at 44 light years distance so therefore it can be used to keep the laser light
on the sail as we push it towards Barnard's Star, now the question comes how do
you stop, the trick I have is the sail is built in two parts an inner central
section about 300 kilometers across and an outer section which extends out to 1
,000 kilometers we take out the inner circular section as we're getting near
barnard and turn it around so it faces the donut shaped part that's left and the
lasers from earth are turned on of course they have to be turned on six years
earlier and this slug of laser light comes out and hits the ring sail and it
keeps pushing that ring sail past barnard and it'll leave we'll lose it but
during the one year that it's near the barnard star the light reflected off the
ring sail is focused back down on to the payload sail it contains the humans
that is facing the other way and so it slows them down and one year they're
brought to a stop at the barnard system while the rest of the sail goes on the
other way so this is a way to use a push to get a pull and in fact after i
invented this idea to get my characters there I realized that I have another
scientific paper and so I just finished preparing that scientific paper which I
will present at the AIAA meeting in Baltimore on the 25th of May and it's a new
way to get to the stars and also if you make three stages you can get back again
so that's another thing that came out of my science fiction writing that I've
been able to turn into a scientific taper. Of course, inventing an interstellar
light sail doesn't make huge much money, but one of these days I may think of an
idea that it will.
The engineer has been sitting here listening to all this and he was inspired to
ask a couple of questions, so I'll let him go ahead and have the floor right
quick. Okay. Yeah, these are just, I'm going to get untangled from my cap cords
here. These are just of interest to me. I'm attempting, with capital A, to write
some science fiction. I talked to Jerry Pournelle about using black holes as power
supply in a spaceship. What are your thoughts on that? Well, as a power supply
for a spaceship. Yes. Okay. You've been beat out by Arthur Clarke. Did you read
Imperial Earth? Yes, I have. Okay, well, there was a black hole that ran the
spaceship that the colonists used to come back to Earth with. And I helped
Arthur design that black hole space drive. Basically a very tiny black hole With
a mass About the size of an asteroid One of the larger asteroids Would be about
10 to the 14th grams If I remember the number right But, you know, it's a large
mass According to Steve Hawking The British theorist in gravity A mass about
that size A black hole about that size Would be about the size of one angstrom
About the size of an atom even though it weighed 10 to the 14th grams or 10 to
the 11th kilograms or whatever
and a black hole that size would be quite hot and the reason it's quite hot is
because it is warping the space around it so much that it pulls particles out of
the space and swallows them. But those particles have partners, anti-particles
or regular particles if the black hole swallows an anti-particle. And in any
case, a very tiny black hole acts like it's hot right outside its surface and it
meets a lot of heat. And in fact, if you don't do anything to that black hole
for a few weeks, it'll get hotter and hotter and then finally it'll explode very
rapidly in a very hot explosion. But if you keep feeding that little tiny black
hole food, anything you want, garbage, it'll get, every time you dump something
in it, it'll cool down a little bit because it's got more massive. When it gets
more massive, it doesn't, isn't as hot. The temperature is inversely
proportional to the mass. So once you've found such a little black hole, you
have an infinite source of energy. All you have to do is keep it fed. And don't
starve it, otherwise it'll explode. So you can use all this hot plasma coming
off from it to do anything you want to. Run up a spaceship, power the solar
system, propulsion, whatever you want. So a tiny black hole is a very useful
mechanism for getting lots of heat. Now the real problem is it weighs 10 to the
14th tons, And if you want to move a spaceship with it, you have to carry it
along with you. So it's not trivial to make a black hole space drive. Right. You
can hold on to that black hole very easily. You just make sure that the stuff
you feed it is always charged a little positively or a little negatively so that
you keep it charged. And especially out in space, you can hold on to that black
hole just using electric and magnetic fields. the same in-form cake. In the case
of a spaceship trying to use it, the engine room will hold on to the black hole,
and the black hole will go where it wants to, and you'll ride along with it
because it weighs more than you do. Right. Anyway, a black hole out in orbit
around the Earth would be a very useful energy source. Question. We can pipe
radar signals through pipes like they do in radar installation. Might it be
possible to pipe gravity through some such similar device? The reason we can
pipe radar signals around is the fact that the world has two kinds of
electricity, positive and negative. Now, the positive particles are the nuclei
of the atoms, the protons. And the negative ones are the electrons that are in
orbit around them, or if they're in a metal like they are in a waveguide
conductor. They're free to move around, even though they always have to stay
close to one proton or another, some nucleus or another. They can't really leave
the waveguide or leave the conductor very easily, although you can do it if you
put enough voltage on it. So when you send a radio wave along a conductor or
through a conductor, the radio wave is really riding on top of all these
electrons. Now unfortunately there's only one kind of mass that we know of that
we have any control of and it's regular positive mass. And although there have
been imaginary mass is allowed by the special theory of relativity and negative
mass is allowed by the general theory of relativity we haven't found any.
antimatter is not negative mass. It is just regular mass that has antiquantum
properties, quantum properties, not antimass properties. So we don't have any
antimatter. Excuse me. We don't have any negative matter. Now, if we did, then
we could make something like a waveguide or a conductor, and we could pipe
gravity waves around. But we don't have it. And so until we find the method of
making negative matter, we can't use that analogy. Now, back in 1961, I wrote a
scientific paper which explained the analogy between electricity, magnetism on
one hand, and gravity on the other hand. And I showed that the Einstein
equations, when they're reduced to elementary things, but still accurately and
scientifically, show a great similarity to the equations for electricity and
magnetism. So, if anything you can do with electricity and magnetism, you should
be able to do with gravity, except some things are not allowed because you don't
have negative gravity. So, that your general feelings are right, that you ought
to be able to pipe gravity around. But unfortunately, we don't have the tool to
do with this. Right. In other words, probably no anti-gravity. Oh no, you can
make negative
electric fields using only positive charges. Or you can make negative gravity
fields using only positive masses. Okay, and you want me to tell you? Let me
just tell you, basically my ships as they exist right now, they keep changing
what I learn. They may never make it to paper because they keep changing so
much. But currently, they simply lift themselves using the gravity generated by
the gravity president, the black hole. In other words, lifting itself by its own
bootstraps, as it were. Well, you have a momentum problem there. You may have
enough energy to do it, but you violate the law of conservation, momentum. And
so what you've got to do is find some way around that. Now, one of the ways is
if you have negative matter, that's minus M, and you push it and give it a
velocity V, then its momentum is minus M times V, or negative momentum. So, one
of the ways to get around the problem is to say that you're going to convert
your positive matter into negative matter. and then every time you push a piece
of negative matter it comes towards you instead of going away and that means
that the Earth will try and pull on that negative matter
oops, I'm wrong I forgot it pulls on it with a negative force so it won't work
but no I'm afraid that one is anyway, it is possible to make negative gravity
fields, but it requires a very heavy machine to do it so the machine can't lift
itself. Ah, okay, well that one's going in the trash can then. Well, no, not
necessarily. All you have to do is, you know, as a writer, you're allowed one or
two
things that are necessary to make the story work and are the differences which
you build your story around. You know, in other words, suppose that you could
levitate and you have to come up with some kind of plausible mechanism, which
you haven't done yet. Nope. But for instance, you might talk about negative
matter and the fact that you've got a machine that turns positive matter into
negative matter. Now negative matter has the instinct property is that it
attracts positive matter. And positive matter, in fact, attracts all matter. I
mean, negative matter repels all matter, including positive matter, and positive
matter attracts negative matter. And so, if you have a negative matter ball and
a positive matter ball side by side, they'll attract each other with a very weak
gravity feel unless they're dense. But the positive one will attract the
negative one. The negative one will push the positive ones. they'll both move
off in the same direction, constantly increasing in velocity. All of this is in
my analog article in 1975. One of these days, I'm going to write an article
which uses that as a space drive. But I haven't done it yet. And the amazing
thing is that no law of energy or momentum is violated because if you have a
mass moving with a velocity V, it has an energy, one half mp squared, right? and
if you have a negative mass moving with the same velocity it has an energy of
minus one-half mb squared and so therefore even though you started with two
particles at rest with no energy they both accelerate according to the force
laws you're not violating the law of conservation of energy because the total
energy of the system is zero because the positive mass is gaining positive
energy a negative mass is gaining in negative energy, and yet they're both
moving. If your positive mass is carrying your spacecraft along with it, well,
you're ahead of the game. They also don't violate momentum, because one momentum
is MV and the other is minus MV. So the total momentum is also zero, even though
they're both now moving near the speed of light. so uh you know there's ways to
use gravity to get spacecraft propulsion but you've got to um be a little
careful how you do it otherwise you can't you know you get something that the
people don't want to read all right yeah i'm gonna go back to the drawing board
and do a little more work on my on my spaceship um another thing why do you want
spacecraft to run on gravity oh i don't know the what do you want to do with the
spacecraft because I can tell you lots of ways to move the spacecraft well
basically I wanted it to have a relatively uh
uh it it it appeared to me that a craft that could manipulate its own
gravitational forces would be pretty flexible as far as going just about
anywhere it wanted to uh under normal conditions you know landing upon uh
planets similar to Mars, similar to the Moon. It would probably have a
relatively rapid acceleration rate. You could travel fairly quickly between
points.
Are you going to give it more than 1g?
Possibly. What are the humans going to do? Are you going to have an antirabody
field for them? Yeah, that was where I had the question about piping gravity
around. Supposedly, if I could pipe the gravity around, then I could control
that. If I can't pipe the gravity around, I can't do that. I've got to work up
something else. Well, you know, lots of people have written stories about those
kind of machines. In fact, I think David Brin, the sun diver, uses something
akin to that. He just, you know, postulates it and doesn't really explain it
very well. but the important thing is he described the effects so well that I
let him get away with it for instance what he had was a saucer shaped object
that was going to operate on the sun he had a central plane that was basically
fairly thin, flat and everything was attracted toward it
so that when you walked around the shell you immediately turned over and you
were talking. You were upside down and talking. He described it well enough that
I was willing to let him get away with it, even though I knew it wasn't possible
to do it physically. So I think that better be what you ought to do. You ought
to come up with a design for the gravity pipe. Say you've got a gravity pipe,
okay? Don't try and explain to me how it works, because you can't. But explain
its effects. and what it would be like to live in that thing until I'm willing
to live in that universe. Even though as a scientist you haven't explained how
to make that gravity pipe. I'm willing to give you that. But what you've got to
do is make the scenery and the effects so weird and yet so consistent and so
believable that I'm willing to stop wondering how the hell does he make gravity
pipes. and if your story is interesting enough, I will Right, in other words
You've got a basic idea and what you want to do with it I think instead of
trying to make it scientifically accurate you can't, as far as I know with our
present scientific knowledge just use the analogies with electricity and
magnetism and say that they have been developed and Einstein's theories have not
been superseded, but have been improved on and people found a way to type
gravity and don't try and explain how. But then describe the effects and what
you're able to do with it and do it in a consistent manner. I don't know what
excuse you're going to have in the back of your mind, but do it in a consistent
manner and maybe you'll get something that will allow for what is called a
suspension of disbelief. Is that right? Yeah, that's what every good science
fiction author aims for. Right, yeah. Unless you write a story that doesn't
require any of that. Right, yeah.
Actually, for instance, in Dragon's Egg, the six masses are not quite in a
perfect orbit.
Also, there's another little problem with Dragon's Egg, which a few people have
found, mentioned to me, and I knew, and there wasn't much I could do about it,
is that using a heat cycle, So the plants I had on Dragon's Egg had a root stuck
into the hot soil and used their canopy to radiate heat to the universe. So they
worked between the temperature difference between the hot soil and the cold
universe instead of the hot sun as we do and evaporation like the plants do
here. If you calculate the amount of energy that could be gotten out of a
thermal cycle, So you wouldn't be able to move many nuclear molecules with it.
It would basically take something like a thousand years for a plant to develop
enough energy to get a pod to nourish one nuclear operating being. So the plants
are not viable, on the dragon's sake. Everything else is, but that's quite a
certain way. I only have one more question. that's the one on wormholes as a
possibility of superseding a faster than light travel. I'm getting from here to
there in a split second. Wormholes are one particular type of space warp. And I
presume you're talking about the John Wheeler wormholes that come out of his
geometrodynamics theory. Yes. Those wormholes are about 10 to minus 35
centimeters across.
And what's more important is that using the geometrodynamics theory, Wheeler
gave his student the problem of can you get through a wormhole and out the other
side faster than it takes you to go across the top? And the student proved, no,
it's not true. It takes you longer to go through the wormhole than it does
across the top. so the wormhole idea is a way of getting from one place to
another without going in between it uses a theory which is not as good as the
Einstein theory because it doesn't seem to predict the right things but it's a
self consistent theory in that own theory people have shown that it isn't a
faster than light mechanism so So, you know, outside of the fact that it's too
small to get through,
it's not a factor, it's not a speed of light mechanism, because in the very same
theory that allows it, it proves it's not. Now, in the Einstein theory, we have
a method for making an entry into a hyperspace, okay? And we know we can make it
big enough to get people through that hole. Now what has not been proved in the
same theory is that you can make another one somewhere else and that the
hyperspace route is shorter. That has not been proved. But the fact that you
have a method of going into hyperspace is interesting in itself, and the fact
that while you're in that hyperspace you can go back and forward in time is even
more important. And in fact, most people that have studied time travel and space
warps has found that if you can do time travel, then you can make a space warp.
And if you can make a space warp, you can do time travel. I mean, time travel is
going from one point in time to another faster than you normally would be able
to, right? Right. And space travel, I mean, faster than light space travel is
going from one point in space to another point in space faster than you want to.
and according to Einstein's special theory there's no difference between space
and time so saying one is equivalent to saying the other okay so that if you can
travel in time and according to the Brandon Carter analysis of the Kerr metric
you can travel in time and the Tipler two-way time machine which is a spinning
cylinder of black mass black hole density also allows you to travel in time
indicates that even though we haven't proven in the Einstein theory that you can
go from one place to another faster than in between, why they're equivalent. And
so that you probably can, one of these days, somebody will prove that the
Einstein gravity theory allows travel from one point in space to another faster
than speed of light. Whether you can really do it or not is another matter.
Okay. That answers both of my questions. I appreciate it very much. Okay, very
good.